# Children's Writer's Word Book

SOME THINGS YOU'LL NEED TO KNOW 
================================

MORE ON WORDS AND LANGUAGE  
----------------------------

### Unusual Words

To introduce words not in the child's standard vocabulary---foreign words, for example---if it is possible, give the definition first, then the word. 
It is also common practice to underline the word the first time it is used. 
Readers of any age tend to skip over unfamiliar words without trying to read them, getting the meaning from the context of the sentence. 
Giving the definition first makes it much easier to actually learn the new word. 

### Names.

Nicknames for your characters can be highly desirable. 
They can help describe someone's personality or appearance with little or no exposition: "Hey, Red, come here!" "Go get Pokey so we can get started." 
They can also set the mood as hostile or friendly or describe the cultural set of an era or a nation. 
They are also excellent "tags" that help your reader remember or identify a character. 
Unless it is important to the story, avoid connecting words like tiny, little, bitty, and small to the names of your protagonists. 
The tiny of Tiny Tim is central to the character and his problem. 
Believe me, Little Leroy and Bitsy Betty have problems, too, whether you intended them or not. 
Psychologically, the diminutive name takes away personal power and emasculates. 
Even names like Jimmy or Billy fall into this cabinet.

### Nonsexist and Nonracist Terminology.

It is good to use generic terminology instead of words that express gender bias. 
For example, use mail carrier instead of mailman, and carry that principle to all occupations or positions that end with man. 
Other things to look out for are usage of the pronoun he. 
Even though it is proper to use the masculine pronoun, try to vary it. 
You can also use the plural they or the neutral third person you. 
Both are widely used today to avoid more awkward constructions such as he/she. 
Another area to avoid in nonsexist writing is stereotypical roles, such as exclusively male doctors and exclusively female nurses in a hospital setting. 
Women and men should be treated the same in all types of stories, as should boys and girls. 
Again, stay away from stereotyping.

### Diversity.

Race, religion, and physical abilities are other areas where you should be sensitive to word usage. 
Use African American or of African heritage instead of black, and Native American instead of Indian. 
Asian American is preferable to Oriental; not all Muslims are Arabs; not all Arabs are Muslim; Hispanics are from the Americas, while Latinos are from any place that speaks Spanish. 
You get the idea; be sensitive, especially to offensive terminology, and seek out an authority when in doubt. 
Children enjoy reading about people like themselves, so it's good to have characters with diverse backgrounds. 
As noted in the introduction, ethnic, cultural pride, and bilingual books, as well as books with disabled characters, have increased in number though they do not yet constitute a large percentage of the publishing world for juvenile readers. 
With the tremendous strides the world has taken toward globalization, diversity has become an important part of juvenile literature, and I expect this to grow dramatically in the next few years. 
Tags. 
An editor may suggest you use a tag to help identify a character. 
Tags are actions or gestures a character typically uses that easily identify the person to the reader. 
A boy may toss his head when he gossips, a young girl may push up her glasses just before she throws a fast pitch. 
The tag may be used to build a character, be part of the problem, or identify a "mystery" person. 
For example, a boy may try to hide in the bushes or shadow a suspect while humming the song he always hums or sniffing a chronically runny nose. 
As noted before, nicknames are another good tag you can use to help describe a character.

THEME AND CONTENT  
-------------------

### Character's Ages.

The protagonist(s) of your story should be the same age as or a little older than the reader. 
Establish the age of the protagonist as soon as possible, and make sure your characters act appropriately for their ages.

### Taboos.

While the market is much more flexible than in the past, stay away from any positive portrayal of drugs, tobacco, alcohol, explicit sex, crime, and violence. 
Drunkenness particularly should never be portrayed in a humorous light. 
You will find certain themes, while not actually taboo, difficult to sell. 
Animals that talk to people are almost impossible to sell---even as fantasy. 
'Lil Toot and The Little Engine That Could aside, anthropomorphizing inanimate objects also makes for a difficult sale. 
Stories that turn out to be only a dream are not often welcome, especially if waking up is used to solve a plot problem. 
Things that are too cute, too old-fashioned, or too common usually get the cold shoulder, too. 

One of those not-taboo-but subjects is weight. 
There is currently a medical, political, and social focus on overweight children and youth that promises to have a very real impact on our culture. 
At the same time, eating disorders are a very real issue, especially with preteens and early teens. 
As a result, the subject of weight should be handled carefully---especially if it is not the focus of the story or book you are writing.

### Fantasy and Fairy Stories.

Fantasy is a healthy field for juvenile publishing. 
However, retelling such classics as Thumbelina or The Goose Girl in modern dress is sure to garner rejection slips instead of praise. 
If you are tempted to begin your story "Once upon a time," you should probably think about how it will fit in your target publisher's list.

### Mystery.

There is a great difference between adult and children's mysteries. 
Violence is generally out for any age group. 
For preteen readers, murder is out, and so are most dead bodies. 
The only corpses are generally ancient mummies that lend a creepy mood to a story. 
Missing treasure, old legends and secrets, theft, and even kidnapping have formed the core of wonderful juvenile mysteries. 
Many mystery books are elaborate puzzles the reader is meant to solve. 

### Science Fiction.

Science fiction becomes popular around fourth or fifth grade when it is a venue for fast-paced adventure. 
With science making headlines daily and subjects such as space and ecology entering the standard curriculum by second or third grade, science fiction stories may well find a home in even younger markets. 
By the sixth grade, character development becomes important. 
Science fiction is often a pleasant and charming way of explaining science or giving facts, but make sure its primary goal is to entertain.

### Romance.

Romance stories are popular with sixth graders on up. 
Contemporary stories often include urban themes such as gangs, alcohol, and sex. 
Today's teens are dealing with some serious situations, and books and stories that accurately reflect their world are popular. 
Nonfiction. 
Nonfiction is popular with readers in the elementary level, and stories in trade books and magazines are often used in the classroom. 
Stories about scientific phenomena, the environment, history, and technology interest every age group but the very youngest. 
Current events and how-to books are welcome at the elementary and high school level. 
Problem-Oriented Stories. 
Issues such as divorce and death (usually the death of a pet) are now being introduced in the first three years instead of, as when this book was first published, the fifth or sixth grade. 
These issues must be handled carefully, but they open up new markets for stories that deal with the modern child's reality.

AGE GROUPS AND READING LEVELS 
------------------------------

This section covers the age groupings and categories of books that publishers recognize. 
First, let's discuss the age groups. 

### Level Books.

Many books are now indicated by levels rather than by specific grades. 
For example, Level 1 is generally used for kindergarten through second grade. 
This three-grade spread recognizes that there is a wide range of normal abilities among students. 
The vocabulary used for the level is the middle one, in this case, first grade. 
Many children are ahead or behind the usual target vocabularies for grade and age, and level books allow the students to use materials that are appropriate for them without some of the social issues involved with reading material identified as being for a grade different from the one the student is in.

### Preschool to Kindergarten.

Preschool books that are self-readers constitute a much larger market than in the past. 
Early childhood education is a major focus of both state and national educational programs, and reading is a primary focus. 
Picture books and picture stories are the primary forms for school and home. 
As a result, the story that is meant to be read by a caregiver to the child, and is not appropriate as a self-reader as well, has become less common. 
While the most common sentence length for self-readers at this level is still about six words, some publishers now use longer sentences (up to fifteen words) for even these youngest readers. 
To do this, they break the sentences into smaller phrases that generally express a whole idea like the writing sample in the kindergarten section:

He ran after the kitten 

when it came into the room. 

### The Primary Age Group.

This group, which includes children from six- to eight-years-old, or first through third grades, reads the picture book, picture story, and easy-to-read book. 
More magazines are aimed at this age group than at younger children. 
The easy reader is meant for the child to read alone, and the target sentence length is five to six words, ten words maximum. 
All the words given in the kindergarten through third-grade word lists are appropriate to use when writing for this group. 
There is some movement toward taking the chapter book concept, in very short chapters, to grades one and two rather than waiting until level three or third grade, as is most common.

### The Elementary Level.

Traditionally this has included the eight- to twelve-year-olds, or the fourth through sixth graders. 
More and more often this now is used to identify third through fifth grade, or seven- through ten- or eleven-year olds. 
The target sentence length here is ten words. 
The longest length acceptable to conservative institutions is about twenty words. 
Sentence length is more flexible in books than in magazines. 
Fiction should have a lot of action, and both fiction and nonfiction should deal with the special interests and problems relevant to this age group. 
Most books written for this age group range between 20,000 and 40,000 words. 
Most magazines use stories ranging from 700 to 2,000 words and often have a page or two of short-shorts under 100 words.

### Middle School Through High School.

Middle school, a new addition to this book, includes the sixth through eighth grades. 
The two groups, middle school and high school, include twelve- to eighteen-year-olds. 
Sixth graders, or twelve-year-olds, always constituted a major portion of the readership. 
This is the time when reading problems often become serious problems. 
Hi-lo books (for high interest, low reading level) and other materials meant to help the student catch up to grade level are introduced here. 
Regular texts that are not in the hi-lo grouping use an adult vocabulary and sentence structure. 
Most books range from 25,000 to 55,000 words, and longer lengths are permissible. 
Popular fiction subjects include romance, mystery, suspense (mild horror), the supernatural, and humor. 
More magazines are aimed at this age group than at any other. 
Magazine stories range from 1,000 to 3,500 words. 
Eighty percent of this market is nonfiction and include age-related problems, interviews, and special interests.

WHAT KIND OF BOOK IS IT?
------------------------

The terms that follow are commonly used by publishers to describe the different types of children's books. 

### Picture Books.

There are basically three types of picture books. 
The first type of picture book is for babies to three-year-olds, has little text, and is often prepared by publishers in-house. 
The next type is for toddlers to five-year-olds. 
The picture books must be kept short enough to be read aloud by an adult to a child at one sitting. 
They should have a happy ending and must use language that can be read aloud comfortably. 
Sentence length should also be determined by reading ease. 
If the book is meant to be an early self-reader, the target sentence length should be five to six words, and each page should lend itself to illustration that will help carry the story. 
Try to use mainly kindergarten and first-grade vocabulary. 
These books should take no more than twenty minutes to read.

The oldest group of picture book readers is for the five- to eight-year-olds. 
These books must have a story to tell. 
They should have a beginning, a middle, and an end. 
There should be a plot, but it should be simple. 
Children in this age group still like to be read to, and rhythm keeps them attentive. 
Picture books may run from as few as 50 words to 1,500. 
Most picture books average 500 to 1,000 words. 
Books for the youngest listeners (through five years old) should take no more than twenty minutes to read; ten to fifteen minutes is preferred. 
Keep in mind the short attention span of the listener. 

### Picture Story.

Picture stories are the picture books in which text carries the story. 
These are for the five- to eight-year-old. 
Picture stories tell a real story and have lots of action. 
If it is written for an adult to read to a child, sentence length is restricted only to that which is comfortable to read aloud, and the vocabulary should be such that the child can understand it, rather than read it. 
The picture story is still heavily illustrated but has a more complicated plot than a picture book.

Easy-to-Read Books (also known as young readers). 
These books are intended for ages six to nine (grades one to three). 
Manuscripts are 500 to 2,000 words, with 1,000 to 1,500 words preferred. 
These books generally have about forty pages of text. 
Sentences should be five to six words in length, with a few up to eight words. 
When putting your story together, try not to break up phrases between lines. 
To make sure that you haven't done this and that your story is easy to read, read it out loud a few times. 
These books are for the child to read alone; if your book is meant to be read by an adult to a child, notify the publisher when you submit it.

### Hi-Lo Books.

The term hi-lo means high interest, low reading level. 
These books are purchased mainly by schools and are written for people learning to read or those who are reading behind grade level. 
They use a controlled vocabulary and a sentence length appropriate to the vocabulary level. 
They use a lot of action and dialogue. 
Romance, mystery, and heritage-based, culturally centered stories, as well as stories dealing with urban problems, are often welcome. 
Most of these books run from 400 to 1,200 words. 

Many publishers want hi-lo books or other graded books but do not supply the word lists. 
It is here that the graded word lists in this book become invaluable. 
Sentence length is about ten to twelve words. 
Stories should be fast paced and have a tightly knit plot. 
You can write a hi-lo book on the second-grade level, but the story must be mature in theme. 

### Young Adult Novels.

These books are written for readers aged twelve to eighteen. 
They are similar to mainstream novels except the protagonist is a teen or young adult, and the story is relevant to that age group.

TECHNICAL ITEMS THAT HELP YOU SELL  
------------------------------------

### Word Count.

One of the most common reasons magazines reject good manuscripts is the failure to include a word count at the top of the first page. 
The use of computers with their varying type faces, sizes, and spacing has made even standard formulas for computing word count unreliable. 
It may not matter with a one- or two-page piece, but editors are not going to sit and count the number of words in your work to see if it will fit their format.

### Standard Format.

There are individuals at writers' conferences and some articles and books that encourage you to have your manuscript stand out by using colored paper or type. 
Even more suggest that your manuscript should include the rights you are selling at the top of the first page or that it should include a copyright notice. 
Virtually all these items mark the author as an amateur. 
Manuscripts other than picture books should be double spaced on white paper with black ink using 12-point type in a standard font. 
If there is no notice of the rights being sold, the author is offering first publication rights in English in North America. 
Only if the author is offering something different should the subject of rights be broached, and then it should be explained in the cover letter. 
Copyright is automatic in the United States and many other countries as well. 
Picture Books. 
The author needs to indicate each page of a picture book. 
In other words, the author should make it obvious what text goes with which picture and that each page is separate. 
The most practical way to do this is to give the line of text with three dots, or other obvious page maker, below it:

The San Diego Zoo has pandas  

That way, a number of pages can be shown on a single manuscript page. 

### Bibliographies.

Occasionally children's periodicals ask writers to submit lists of reference material to support their facts. 
Do keep track of your source material; do not submit it with your story until asked for it unless you know the periodical requires it. 
Books are another matter; reference material should be cited with any work of nonfiction or fiction.

OTHER TYPES OF WRITING  
------------------------

So far this book has primarily dealt with books. 
A great many other markets are available to authors who write for children, including magazines, radio and television, and the legitimate stage. 

### Features.

A feature is a newspaper or magazine story that allows emotional involvement or entertains as well as informs. 
Such stories almost always make your audience feel something or want to do something. 
Feature stories really come into their own at the elementary level. 
Fourth-, fifth-, and sixth-grade magazines often use the feature story style to lend life to science, mathematics, and news stories. 
Educational inserts in daily newspapers and special educational newspapers also use these kinds of stories.

### Fillers.

A filler is a short article or story---usually under 500 words and often under 100. 
Fillers, such as games, riddles, and items of special scientific or human interest, are especially welcome in young children's periodicals. 
In broadcasting, fillers are short, nonessential stories kept on hand in case a program runs short. 
If you are helping to produce a children's television or radio news program, keep a number of these on hand and at the bottom of the reader's pile. 
Trivia about such things as the world's largest pizza or the biggest pair of shoes is interesting and can be carried week after week until needed.

### Writing for Television.

The existence of public-access cable television channels and the availability of reasonably priced videotaping equipment have created a variety of exciting opportunities for people throughout the country. 
Even the smallest schools often videotape students presenting a weekly news report or original drama to be shown on these television channels or for use in the classroom.

Television news and other productions that narrate silent videos the viewers are watching generally use a forty- to forty-five-space line for the script, typed in a double- or triple-spaced column down the right-hand side of the paper. 
Common margin settings are thirty for the left margin and seventy for the right margin. 
The placement allows the left side of the paper to be used to note what video accompanies the text. 
Each forty-space line takes about two seconds of on-air time to read. 
Triple spacing makes it easier for the reader to keep his place and the writer to edit the work. 

### Writing for Radio.

Many schools now have their own FM radio broadcasting facilities or access to local college or commercial stations. 
It's easy to produce material for this medium according to professional industry standards; and like so many other things, it's just as easy for the children to learn the correct format as any other. 
Standard radio broadcast format uses a sixty-five-space line for typing. 
This line length makes timing your stories easy. 
Each group of sixteen lines takes about one minute to read aloud. 
It is assumed it takes 3.75 seconds to read each line.

### Writing in Verse.

Verse seems to be everywhere in children's publishing, yet it is sometimes very hard to sell. 
One of the problems is that verse must sound good when read out loud, and it needs to be easy to read for an extended period. 
Read your work into a tape recorder, have a friend read it to you, or take it to a writers' workshop. 
If you stumble or have trouble reading it smoothly and easily, go back to work. 
It is a lot easier to sell verse to a magazine because it is generally interspersed with other types of material. 
A good track record publishing verse in magazines will make it easier to sell a book written the same way.

### Writing Plays.

Children's plays can be written one of three ways: (1) with children as actors, (2) with adults as actors and children as the audience, and (3) with adults or teens as actors and young adults and teens as the audience. 
For younger children, action is important, just as it is in other forms of children's writing. 
As always, themes and protagonists must correlate with the intended audience.

NATIONAL STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS  
===================================

National standards and benchmarks have been created in a variety of fields. 
The reading standards included here apply directly to your work and can help you not only sell your work to a broad audience but also help you identify some of the criteria on which your work may be judged. 
These standards are also an excellent reference for both educators and people who home school. 
There are also standards already in place for science, mathematics, technology, writing, and a wide variety of other subjects. 
While those may well help you with your work, they are not appropriate to include here in full. 
You will find a brief description of some resources to these areas following the reading and comprehension standards. 

NATIONAL READING AND COMPREHENSION STANDARDS  
----------------------------------------------

National reading and comprehension standards are grouped with several grades: K--2, 3--5, and 6--8. 
Grades 4--6 used to be grouped, but because of the popularity of middle schools, the sixth grade is now normally included with the older grades. 
For a variety of reasons, ranging from multiple languages being spoken in a classroom to the impact of natural disasters (which cause stress and, often, interrupt education), reading comprehension testing shows that much of this middle school population struggles to understand materials traditionally targeted to the older elementary group.1 Thus, the learning period for traditional reading skills has been expanded to include middle schools, and many, if not most, reading comprehension materials and tests group middle school with at least sixth grade. 
You will also find pre-k has been added due to the national effort for early childhood education. 
These pre-k standards are more for comprehension and reading readiness than for reading itself. 
Additionally, though kindergarten through second grades are grouped, you will find a separate kindergarten group specifically geared toward the youngest learners in the standard public school system. 
It should be noted that the UK has developed very similar standards and benchmarks, and the American and British versions are virtually interchangeable.  

PRE-KINDERGARTEN  
------------------

National standards assume that, before entering kindergarten, a child will know the following skills: 

1. 
The child should understand that written symbols, whether handwritten or in print, can convey meaning and represent spoken language. 

2. 
The child should be able to associate sounds with written words. 

3. 
The child should know the differences between letters, numbers, and words, and the significance of spaces between words. 

4. 
The child should know that illustrations and pictures can convey meaning and add to the understanding of the written context. 

5. 
The child should know that books should be held upright, that they have pages, and that they are read from front to back. 

6. 
The child should know that, in English, print is read from left to right, top to bottom. 

7. 
The child should know at least some letters of the alphabet. 

8. 
The child should recognize some familiar words in print, such as her own first name. 

9. 
The child should know how to spell his own first name. 

10. 
The child should know that printed information is used in a variety of places such as books, letters, and food labels, and that each of those conveys information that serves a particular purpose. 

11. 
The child should know familiar words and numbers in her environment such as stop signs, the names of stores, and street signs. 

12. 
The child should be able to make simple predictions about upcoming events or outcomes in stories using illustrations and prior knowledge as a guide. 

13. 
The child, gathering information from pictures, should be able to tell the general story presented in a book or pretend to read the story to himself or others. 

14. 
The child should know that books have titles, authors, and sometimes illustrators. 

15. 
The child should know what role the author plays (the writer of the story). 

16. 
The child should know that the illustrator draws the pictures in the book. 

17. 
The child should know the title is the name of the book. 

18. 
The child should know the sequence of events in a story: what happens first, in the middle, and at the end. 

19. 
The child should know the elements of a story such as the names of the characters, what happens in the story (the plot), where the story is set, and so on. 

20. 
The child should understand the literal meaning of plays, poems, and stories. 

21. 
The child should know the difference between fact and fiction, that is, real and make-believe. 

22. 
The child should be able to tell stories from her own life and share her personal experiences.

 23. 
The child should be able to use drawings to express thoughts, feelings, and ideas. 

KINDERGARTEN  
--------------

National standards assume that students will already have accomplished the skills listed as pre-K. 
During kindergarten, the following skills should be added: 

1. 
Unlike the middle of the last century, children are now encouraged to use their imagination in many areas, including reading. 
Reading programs now encourage children to use mental images based on both the pictures and printed words to help them understand the text. 

2. 
The student should be able to identify visual similarities and differences in words. 
For example, he should be able to see that the words boy and boys, or farm and farmer are similar and also be able to discriminate between them. 

3. 
The student is expected to use the subject that she is reading about, as well as picture captions, the story title, and other clues, to aid comprehension and make predictions about what will happen in the story or what a specific character will do. 

4. 
The student is encouraged to sound words out using basic elements of phonetic analysis such as common letter combinations, letter sounds, and word patterns to figure out unknown words. 

5. 
The student should be able to distinguish between written letters, words, and sentences.

 6. 
The student should know the alphabet well enough to be able to identify uppercase and lowercase letters out of alphabetical sequence.

7. 
The student should be able to associate specific sounds with specific letters. 

8. 
The student should be able to verbalize consonant sounds when shown consonant letters. 

9. 
The student should be able to recognize rhyming words, primarily consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC) words such as cat, hat, bat, rat. 

10. 
The student should read selected sight words, such as doll and candy, very early in the year. 
By the end of the year, the student should be able to read all the words given in the kindergarten list in this book. 

11. 
The student should be able to recall orally a series of three items that she is shown. 

12. 
The student should be able to use words that signal sequence relationships such as first, next, and last; up, down, around; and over, under. 

13. 
The student should be able to recognize simple word opposites such as boy and girl, left and right. 

14. 
The student should be able to classify objects by characteristics such as color, size, shape, structure, and function. 

15. 
The student should be able to put pictures in a sequence to tell a logical story. 

16. 
The student should be able to interpret pictures to identify main idea, sequence of events, cause-effect, and to predict logical outcomes. 

17. 
The student should be able to explain his own drawings and writings in a logical manner or to tell a story. 
This indicates that the student understands that illustrations and writing can have meaning. 

18. 
The student's vocabulary should reflect an increasing range of knowledge and interests. 

KINDERGARTEN THROUGH SECOND GRADE (LEVEL 1)  
---------------------------------------------

1. 
By first grade, the young reader has been introduced to syllables, basic prefixes, suffixes, and root words; and by second grade, to compound words, contractions, and spelling patterns. 
These are basic elements of structural analysis. 
At the appropriate levels, the child is expected to use these skills to decode unknown words. 

2. 
Depending on the school and the teacher, in first or second grade, the student should be introduced to the idea of a dictionary. 
In first grade, a picture dictionary is most often used to determine the meaning of words the student does not understand. 

3. 
The student is expected to understand, as well as read, level-appropriate words and vocabulary such as those given in this book's thesaurus. 
That may sound a little odd, but new readers are often able to sound out words without understanding what they mean. 

4. 
When the young reader does not understand the text, she is expected to search for clues, identify where she has misread or misunderstood words or ideas, reread, and ask for help. 
Known as self-correction strategies, the student is expected to take an active part in the development of her reading skills.

 5. 
Reading aloud is usually introduced in first grade. 
The student is expected to read familiar stories and poems fluently and with appropriate expression such as rhythm and meter, smooth flow, intonation, and pitch and tone by the time he is well into the second grade. 

6. 
The student is also introduced to the basic characteristics of familiar types of books, including fairy tales, folktales, fiction, nonfiction, legends, fables, myths, poems, nursery rhymes, picture books, and predictable books.

 7. 
The student should then be able to use these reading skills to understand these types of age-appropriate literature.

8. 
The beginning of literary analysis is introduced, and the student is expected to know about setting, main characters, main events, sequence, and problems in stories. 
The student is also expected to know the main ideas, or theme, of a story. 

9. 
The student is expected to be able to relate his own personal experiences, including who was involved, what happened, the conflicts, and a general theme. 

10. 
The student is expected to use the same skills and strategies to understand and interpret a variety of nonfiction and fiction texts, including written directions, signs, captions, and warning labels. 

11. 
The student should understand the main idea and supporting details of simple expository writing. 

12. 
The student should be able to summarize, or retell in her own words, the information read in the text. 

13. 
The student should be able to relate the new information to his own prior knowledge and experience. 

14. 
The student is asked to use her imagination, based on the pictures and words in the text, to aid in understanding the material she is reading. 

15. 
Meaning clues are introduced. 
That is, picture captions, the title of the writing, headings, and other hints are used to have the student make predictions about what is going to happen in a story or what a nonfiction piece will be about. 

16. 
The student is expected to be able to use phonetic strategies to sound out and decode unknown words. 

17. 
The student is expected to use structural analysis to better understand unknown words. 
Structural analysis includes breaking the words into syllables, identifying common prefixes and suffixes, finding root words, identifying compound words, and understanding contractions. 

18. 
The student should be able to read and understand level-appropriate sight words and vocabulary such as those listed for her grade in this book. 

19. 
The student should use self-correction strategies such as rereading and asking for help.

 20. 
The student should practice reading aloud familiar stories, poems, and passages with fluency and expression. 

21. 
The student is expected to be familiar with, and know the difference between, a variety of literary types, including fables, fairy tales, folktales, legends, myths, poems, nursery rhymes, nonfiction, and more general fiction. 

22. 
The student should be able to identify setting, main characters, main events, sequence, and problems in stories. 

THIRD THROUGH FIFTH GRADE (LEVEL 2)  
-------------------------------------

1. 
In third grade, the idea of previewing materials to help understand the content is expanded by having the student skim the materials in addition to the clues formerly introduced. 

2. 
Also introduced are the many reasons for reading such as for information, for pleasure, or to understand a specific viewpoint. 

3. 
Along with making simple predictions about what the reading materials will be about, or what will happen, the student learns to revise her predictions when they are not correct. 

4. 
The idea of foreshadowing is introduced in a simple way. 

5. 
Phonic and structural analyses become more sophisticated, and syntactic structure and semantic context to decode unknown words such as vowel patterns, complex word families, and affixes are further introduced. 

6. 
The idea of reading ahead and taking words in context are used to decode unknown words. 
7. 
By at least the fourth grade, regular dictionaries are introduced, and the student is taught how to use a variety of other word reference materials such as a glossary and thesaurus to determine the meaning, pronunciation, and derivations of unknown words. 

8. 
The student is introduced to synonyms, antonyms, homophones, and words with multiple meanings. 

9. 
The student should monitor his own reading strategies and make modifications as needed like recognizing when he is confused by a section of text or questions whether the text makes sense. 

10. 
The student should understand that she can adjust her reading speed to suit her purpose and the difficulty of the material.

11. 
The student should understand the author's purpose or point of view. 
For example, he should be able to identify whether the writer is trying to persuade or inform the reader. 

12. 
The student should be able to select reading material of direct interest or use to her based on her knowledge of genres, authors, and why they are choosing the material. 

13. 
The student should understand the basic concept of plot, including the main problem, conflicts, and resolutions. 

14. 
Literature from other cultures is often introduced in the third and fourth grade. 
The student should understand the similarities and differences between those works and those from her own culture, including setting, what characters are expected to do, and the roles of people and nature. 

15. 
The elements of character development in literary works are introduced. 
These include the differences between main and minor characters; stereotypical characters as opposed to fully developed characters; changes that characters undergo; the importance of a character's actions, motives, and appearance to plot and theme. 

16. 
The student should know that themes and basic plots recur across literary works. 

17. 
By fifth grade, the student should understand personification, alliteration, onomatopoeia, simile, metaphor, imagery, hyperbole, beat, and rhythm. 

18. 
The student should be able to make connections between characters or basic events that she is reading about and people or events in her own life. 

19. 
New kinds of literary works are introduced such as formal textbooks, biographies, letters, diaries, directions, and magazines. 

20. 
The student should be able to explain the differences between different kinds of nonfiction materials, including biographies, diaries, directions, letters, magazines, and textbooks. 

21. 
The student should be able to use the way information is organized in a text to find main ideas and specific information quickly. 
This means using topic sentences, graphics, summaries, and headings. 

22. 
Along with using organizational hints within the text, the student is expected to learn to use the physical layout of the book, including the table of contents, index, glossary, and appendix, to find information in an efficient manner. 

23. 
The student should be able to summarize and paraphrase information from a text, including the main idea and major supporting details. 

24. 
The student should be able to draw from his previous knowledge and experience to respond to what he has read and to help understand new information. 

25. 
The student should be able to explain different ways a work is organized or how information in the work is organized; for example, chronologically or sequentially. 
This also includes writing that is centered on organization such as compare and contrast, proposition and support, and cause and effect. 

26. 
The student should be able to understand the function of chapter breaks in both fiction and nonfiction books. 
27. 

The student should be able to identify different genres of fiction such as fantasy, folk tales, mainstream, and science fiction. 

SIXTH THROUGH EIGHTH GRADE (LEVEL 3)  
--------------------------------------

1. 
At this level, the student should be able to explain the reason she is reading a specific text. 
These reasons may include enjoyment, problem solving, skimming for facts, reviewing previous material, or understanding an issue or viewpoint. 

2. 
The student should be introduced to the etymology of words fairly early in sixth grade if not before. 
This includes Latin and Greek roots, meanings of foreign words frequently used in English, and historical influences, as well as the individual origin of a particular word. 

3. 
The now more sophisticated student should understand analogies, idioms, metaphors, and similes and be able to use them to infer the meaning of phrases. 

4. 
The student should also use comparison and contrast, definitions, and examples to make sure he understands the meaning of individual words and to identify shades of meaning between synonyms. 

5. 
The student should know denotative and connotative meanings of the reading material. 

6. 
The student should understand the vocabulary of current events even if it is nonstandard for the age. 

7. 
The student should be able to use references such as rhyming dictionaries, etymological dictionaries, and classification books. 

8. 
Techniques for understanding confusing texts should have grown to include consulting other sources, representing abstract information as mental pictures, and drawing on background knowledge. 

9. 
The student should be able to identify the ways in which an author uses language to persuade readers to his viewpoint or to accomplish another purpose. 
The student should be able to identify the use of emotion, appeal to authority, how word choice affects attitude, language structure, and other techniques. 

10. 
The student should be able to form and express an opinion about what she has read and be able to respond to the text. 

11. 
The student should be able to identify and understand complex elements of plot development such as the use of subplots, parallel episodes, and climax, as well as the development of conflict and resolution. 

12. 
Similarly, the student should be able to identify and explain the elements of character development such as character traits, motivations, relationships between characters, stereotypes, and plot development. 
The student should also understand the development of characters through their actions, thoughts, words, and interaction with other characters. 

13. 
The student should understand foreshadowing, flashback, the development of suspense or tension, and similar literary devices. 

14. 
The student should understand that the way language is used in literature helps convey mood and meaning as well as create mental images. 
Some of the literary techniques include dialect, dialogue, irony, rhyme, symbolism, and tone. 
This should also include the actual sound of the word and how it interacts with other words, for example, alliteration; assonance; consonance; euphonious and cacophonous words; onomatopoeia; and figurative language such as similes, metaphors, personification, hyperbole, and allusion. 

15. 
The student should also be aware that the structure of the writing can convey emotion and affect the tempo of the story. 
For example, very short sentences are often used to create tension or convey urgency while long sentences with adjectives are often used to slow the pace of a story. 

16. 
The student should be able to explain the effect of an author's style, such as word choice and imagery, on the reader. 

17. 
The student should be able to identify the point of view used in a literary text such as first or third person, limited and omniscient, and how that affects what the reader knows. 

18. 
The student should be able to explain implied and recurring themes in literary works such as good versus evil; bravery; friendship; loyalty; and historical, cultural, and social themes. 

19. 
The student should be able to see the similarities between the motivation of characters in a text, or the causes of complex events, and her own life and the world around her. 

20. 
By sixth grade, the student should be able to follow map routes, order from a catalogue, use bus schedules and understand routes, and use telephone and other directories 

21. 
The student should be able to make judgments on the quality of source materials, such as between standard newspapers and tabloids. 
The student should also be able to make critical judgments about, and know how to use, primary source materials such as letters and historical documents. 

22. 
Besides being able to summarize read materials, the student should be able to properly quote materials and convey the author's viewpoint. 

23. 
The student should be able to draw conclusions based on implicit, as well as explicit, information in a text. 

24. 
The student should be able to differentiate between fact and opinion within the same text. 

WHERE TO FIND INFORMATION ON OTHER STANDARDS AND BENCHMARKS 
------------------------------------------------------------

Science and Technology  Many, if not most, magazines for children now have science stories as a regular part of their content. 
Project 2061 of the American Association for the Advancement of Science is a long-term initiative dealing with K--12 science nationwide. 
The project is creating a coordinated set of reform tools and services---books, CD-ROMS, online resources, and workshops-to help educators work toward science literacy for all students, and is a wonderful resource for writers who want to enter that market. 
Find them at http:// www.project 2061.org.

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and MCI World Com offer lessons and Web resources organized around Project 2061 "Benchmarks for Science Literacy." They also provide the research that went into creating those benchmarks. 
They are found at http://www.sciencenetlinks.com/index.html 

National Science Education Standards have been developed by the National Research Council. 
The National Academy Press has the full text of these standards online at http://stills.nap.edu/html/nses.

The National Council for Geographic Education (NCGE) has created a program called "Geography for Life." It is the final report of the Geography Education Standards Project, which was funded through the NCGE by the U.S. 
Department of Education, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the National Geographic Society. 
"Geography for Life" provides a set of guidelines for what students should know, and be able to do, by the end of grades 4 and 8. 
The URL is http://www.ncge.org/publications/tutorial/.

Content for the Study of Technology was created by the International Technology Education Association. 
They try to provide the basics of what every student needs to know about technology and what they should be able to do with it. 
They provide an organizational framework for an articulated program in technology from grades K-12 and a structure for teaching technology that can withstand the accelerating changes in our technological environment. 
Their "Standards for Technological Literacy: Content for the Study of Technology" can be found at http://www.iteawww.org/TAA/TAA.html

The same group has developed National Educational Technology Standards (NETS). 
The primary goal of NETS is to enable those who write for or work with pre-K-12 education to have national standards for the educational uses of technology. 
The NETS project is working to integrate curriculum technology into the wider world of education. 
Though a work in progress at this time, the site will be of increasing use over the next several years. 
It is located at http://cnets.iste.org/.

Mathematics 

The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Principles and Standards for School Mathematics" was released in 2000. 
The electronic version of the latest standards is available online. 
The document is designed to establish a broad framework to guide reform in school mathematics in the next decade for pre-K through grade 12. 
Find them at http://standards-e.nctm.org. 
For vignettes and lessons that help explicate the new standards, see the Illuminations Web site, published by NCTM and MCI Worldcom, at http:// illuminations.nctm.org/

Other Resources

The Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) has made the full text of Key State Policies on K-12 Education available through searching http://www.ccsso.org/publications/index.cfm?init=1. 
Other publications that may be of interest through this site include "Alignment of Science and Mathematics Standards and Assessments in Four States."

A Compendium of Standards and Benchmarks for K-12 Education is available at http://198.17.205.11/standards-benchmarks/

Each U.S. 
state has a department of education. 
Contact information and Web sites for each state and most territories are listed in the back of this book, in the Resources section. 
Many of the states and territories have standards and benchmarks online. 
Virtually all the online materials can be found by searching within the Web sites for standards, benchmarks, framework, or course of study. 
You can also find hotlinks to each state's education Web site online at http://www.census.gov/mso/www/educate/agencies.htm.

Footnote

One survey in Southern California showed as many as fifty separate languages were spoken as primary, or first, languages by students in a single school district.

KINDERGARTEN
============

### Social Changes.

At one time, kindergarten was considered primarily a socialization process. 
Those days are gone. 
The federal government is promoting preschool education for all students. 
In a growing number of places in the country, children actually have to pass a reading competency test to "graduate" into first grade. 
Teachers now must teach reading skills, and there is a growing demand for stories for classroom use. 
This makes read-it-yourself literature even more relevant than before. 
There are also new subjects introduced at the earliest ages. 
While actual lessons on space exploration and ecology currently wait until second or third grade, the concepts are introduced here, and one should expect these subjects to be introduced formally in the future at even younger ages.

### In the Classroom.

Because of the ever-growing number of kindergartners who have attended preschool, some are able to read materials previously considered appropriate for first to third graders. 
Health education begins, or continues, in kindergarten. 
Children are often given toothbrushes and encouraged to brush their teeth at school. 
Nutrition is discussed in terms of eating a good breakfast and drinking milk and personal hygiene is also promoted. 
If you can make these health issues fun or interesting, educational publishers and trade magazines such as Highlights for Children could turn into great marketplaces. 

Words for holidays such as Halloween, Christmas, and Easter may seem too advanced for this level, but are, in fact, commonly used. 
Like many complicated picture books, they are understood in context and become recognized as "sight" reading words rather than "phonic" ones. 
Mother's Day, Valentine's Day, February as Black History Month, and President's Day have all come into major focus in schools. 
Even though they may not be vacation holidays, a great deal of time is devoted to talking, writing, and arts and crafts projects in celebration of these days. 
Poetry and short stories with themes geared to these minor holiday are a part of classroom learning. 
Dinosaurs are popular with young children, but they are treated in a simplified manner here and formally introduced in second grade. 
However, dinosaurs are often a focus in the kindergarten classroom and are the basis of art projects, music, and developing reading and writing skills. 
They make good subjects for shape books or picture and coloring books. 
If you use the scientific names for the different species, or discuss subjects such as family, diet, or other behavior, be sure they're compatible with current opinions. 
For example, the brontosaurus is now generally accepted as not having really lived. 
Brontosaurus is actually just an Apatosaurus, whose head was replaced with the wrong skull. 
Cooking is often used in the same way and provides hands-on experience that can lend extra dimensions to classroom learning. 

### Specific Vocabulary Development.

The kindergarten student's vocabulary centers around one-syllable words, under six letters. 
The numbers one to ten and the primary colors are introduced in kindergarten. 
Seasons are also introduced (autumn is known as fall). 
Kindergartners know words like the and a as well as tree and, of course, boy and girl. 
Most publishers do not use contractions yet, and possessives are not commonly used either. 
The months and days of the week are not usually introduced until first grade. 
The animals most commonly introduced at the kindergarten level are included in the following word list. 
Groups of animals and plants are particularly flexible. 
Please see the first- through third-grade lists for other animals that are introduced at the earliest levels.

### Publishing.

Schools primarily use picture books and magazines, which traditionally address the two- to eight-year-old child. 
Picture stories are also good for this group, although traditionally meant for the first- to third-grade child. 
Whether meant to be read aloud by an adult or alone by the child, the story line is carried more by text than by pictures in the picture story. 
These stories should have lots of action. 

Books meant to be read by adults to the youngest listeners should take no more than twenty minutes to read; ten to fifteen minutes is preferred. 
The sentence length can vary but should be such that the child that is being read to can follow it easily. 
If the sentences are long, they should have breaks and pictures to keep the child in the story. 
The self-reader should have a sentence, or idea, length of five to six words. 
That means that a long sentence can be broken up into shorter phrases, but those phrases should convey a whole idea. 
For example, in a self reader the sentence, It is best to have two when you go to the zoo, might be broken up into it is best to have two as one idea phrase and when you go to the zoo and a second idea phrase. 
Dialogue at this level is often set off by a full colon, rather than by quotation marks: 

Mother said: See the sun. 
Today will be fun. 

Stories about other holidays that take into account our nation's cultural diversity are often eagerly sought. 
You may find Chinese New Year, Chanukah, and Kwanzaa have little or no competition in the marketplace, yet they provide a healthy market for the children's writer and excellent formats for creative writing exercises in class. 
Magazines, book publishers, and even newspapers often look for holiday material for children, and it's easier to sell stories about holidays that get less media coverage than Christmas and Easter. 

### Writing Samples.

The following is a picture story meant for the adult to read to the kindergarten child. 
The dots indicate a picture or a page break and each of the ideas would be illustrated.

- There is one girl. 
One. 
And she wants to have fun. 
- She can roll a ball, - color, - draw, - ride a bus, - play with the cat. 

- She can walk the dog 

- or play with her doll. 

- But one, just one,

- cannot play bat the ball,  

- or go fish 

- or run, red, run. 

- One, just one, cannot play house 

- or school 

- or store. 

- It is best to have two when you go to the zoo 

- or go for a walk

 - or just want to talk. 

- It is a good thing she has a brother.

To make this story into a self reader, the sentence, or idea phrase, length should be changed. 

- There is one girl. 
One. 

- And she wants to have fun. 

- She can roll a ball. 

- She can color. 

She can ride a bus. 

- She can play with the cat. 

- She can walk the dog. 

- Or play with her doll. 

- But one cannot play ball. 

- Or play go fish. 

- Or play run, red, run. 

- One cannot play house.

 - Or play school. 

- Or play store. 

- You need two for the zoo. 

- Or to go for a walk. 

- Or just to talk. 

- She is glad she has a brother.

The sentences are not actually complete, but a period is often used to show a complete thought. 
Short sentences or idea phases are less daunting to a young reader. 
It gives them a feeling of accomplishment to finish a sentence unit and understand it.

FIRST GRADE  
=============

Unlike the middle of the last century, children are now encouraged to use their imagination in many areas, including reading. 
One of the first things reading programs now encourage children to do is to use mental images based on both the pictures and printed word to help young readers understand the text. 
In a related strategy, they are expected to use the subject that they are reading about, picture captions, the story title, and other clues to aid comprehension and make predictions about what will happen in the story or what a specific character will do.

When Word Book was first published, phonics was only one of several popular strategies for teaching reading to the youngest children. 
As the new century takes off, phonics has returned to center stage, and children nationally are encouraged to sound words out using basic elements of phonetic analysis such as common letter combinations, letter sounds, and word patterns to figure out unknown words. 

### Social Changes.

Although many first graders have been in all-day kindergarten, some are new to being away from home all day long, and all first graders are new to the sustained periods of concentration that are necessary in the first-grade classroom.

### In the Classroom.

While children learn the seasons and the numbers one to ten in kindergarten, the months, days of the week, and numbers over ten generally are introduced in first grade. 
Almost all sports are introduced by name at this level. 
However, the technical details and rules are not generally introduced until third grade.

By the end of kindergarten, most children can sound out any three- or four-letter word. 
However, many of these words (such as eve or dim) are introduced later since they are somewhat abstract. 
(If a word seems overly sophisticated for your young audience, check the word list or the thesaurus sections in this book; the words listed there are taken from publishers' graded material.) 

### Specific Vocabulary Development.

The prefix un is introduced for the simplest of words such as unhappy, unfit, or undo. 
The suffix ing is also introduced, and words such as fishing, walking, and reading are common. 
The past tense is also introduced. 
This includes irregular forms such as know to knew and was to were, as well as the addition of a simple ed such as ask to asked and walk to walked. 

Possessives are introduced at the very beginning of the year. 
Dad's hat and mother's dress appear along with the other changes mentioned, which give the writer a great deal more flexibility than when writing for the youngest self-readers. 
Contractions such as I'd, I'll, I'm, I've, we're, can't, and won't are introduced at this level. 
The most commonly used compound words, such as classroom and grandmother, are introduced in first grade, but many schools wait until second grade even if the individual words are understood by the child. 
The key seems to be how familiar the reader is with the concept and how often the word is used in their everyday lives. 

### Publishing.

The optimal sentence length is still around five to six words. 
However, as with all writing, length should vary throughout your story. 
Some publishers are now using longer sentences but use the strategy of breaking them up into five- or six-word lines. 
The longest sentence length used in a strictly graded text for this age is ten words. 
Parenthetical statements should be avoided. 
Sentence length is important because the early reader can become lost in the individual words and have trouble understanding the overall idea. 
The constraints on sentence length are eased by the ability to start sentences with such words as and, because, and but. 
Sentences at this level need to be whole ideas but do not necessarily need to conform to strictly correct adult standards. 

If the story is written for an adult to read to a child, sentence length is only restricted to that which is comfortably read aloud in one breath. 
The vocabulary should be such that the child can easily understand it, but it is not constrained to a graded vocabulary. 

There is a much larger periodical market for the primary group than there is for the very beginning reader. 
Very short articles or stories, known as fillers, are popular in magazines. 
These fillers are usually under 500 words and often under 100. 
One editor told me that "if you can make brushing your teeth fun, you can make a living the rest of your life." Games, riddles, and stories about good health habits, safety, science, and human interest pieces are especially welcome even in the most prestigious periodicals. 

As mentioned earlier, most sports are understood by name at this level and are especially popular in literacy books for older readers. 
There is a great appetite for stories and nonfiction articles about everything from baseball to karate; however, the technical details and rules are not generally introduced until the reader achieves third-grade reading skills. 

Like sports, simple mysteries and "friendly" ghost stories are popular among first graders or level 1 books. 
Many, if not most, of the fiction stories published for six- to eight-year-olds are fantasies, but retelling such classics as The Goose Girl in modern dress is sure to garner rejection slips instead of praise. 
Two areas that are popular are stories that show a child being able to help her family or community in a realistic manner and children dealing with minor problems in appropriate ways. 
Problems like the death of a goldfish or a divorce is acceptable if it is done with a light touch. 

Books for teens and adults learning to read often start at the first-grade level rather than kindergarten. 
Most of these books are presented much like those for the young reader but with fewer pictures than those for children, and many are presented in a standard paperback format. 
They primarily feature romance, sports, suspense, nonviolent mysteries, and other high-interest subjects. 
They may also address such practical areas as working, social skills, and legal problems and how to solve them. 
The vocabulary, length, and style guidelines are uniform for the level no matter who the end user. 

### Writing Sample.

The following story employs a popular subject--- ghosts---and a popular genre---mystery. 
It also takes on a common "problem" for kids---moving. 
The sentences are within the ten-word limit, and the words are monosyllabic. 
Another theme present is adaptation. 
First graders adapt to full days of school work, and Tommy adapts to new surroundings:

Tommy looked at the old house. 
There was a ghost in that house. 
It was a little ghost, just like Tommy. 
He could see the top of its white head. 
He could see its eyes. 
But that was all. 
It had to be a small ghost. 

"This is OK. 
A ghost is fun," he said. 
"Moving here may be OK." 

Tommy did not like to move. 
He did not want to move from the city. 
But his father was a park ranger. 
He worked at a beach park now so they all had to move.

 His father liked the beach. 
So did his brother Bob. 
His mother loved their house. 
Most houses for rangers are not new. 
This one was new and it was big. 
Tommy was the only one who did not want to live there. 

"But a ghost is really OK," he said. 
"The old house is OK. 
The new house may be OK, too."

SECOND GRADE  
==============

In the second and third grades, the smallest number of new words are added to a new reader's vocabulary. 
The two grades together add the average number in each of the other grades. 
One change from the earlier edition of the book is the addition of the proper names of the most common dinosaurs. 
Previously, even though dinosaurs were very popular with even the youngest child, proper names were not used in graded literature until fifth grade. 
That is still true of the most unusual types, but the most common, such as Stegosaurus or Triceratops, are now introduced here. 
Additionally, children are introduced to science, particularly biology and ecology. 
Still, overall, this is a time to confirm skills and allow those who were not as ready to catch up. 

### Social Changes.

One of the major changes common at this age is that most children have become less self-oriented than they were in kindergarten and even first grade. 
As a result, they have stopped generalizing characters, and individual personalities have become important in stories.

### In the Classroom.

A beginning study of the solar system is often part of the second-grade curriculum. 
The continents and the cardinal directions, north, south, east, and west, are generally taught in school, and there is usually some work with the world map.

Schools introduce their home state, other major states, and a few foreign countries by this level. 
These countries include major powers and nations that are near neighbors of the United States both physically and culturally. 
The best known states, such as New York, California, Florida, and Texas, are familiar to the second grader as he learns about the continental United States. 
More explanation or description may be needed in introducing difficult names or lesser known states. 
Canada and Mexico, which border the United States, and England, France, and Germany are introduced at this level. 
Nations currently in the news are often familiar to the second grader also. 

Foreign or unusual words begin to be introduced in second grade. 
When including words that are not in the child's vocabulary, it is best to give the definition first and then the word. 
Readers tend to skip over unfamiliar words, getting the meaning from the context of the sentence. 
Giving the definition first makes it much easier to learn the new word; for example, a large open plain in Africa is called a savanna. 

### Specific Vocabulary Development.

While some of the most common compound words were introduced in first grade, far more are introduced in second grade. 
At this point, any compound words that are made up of words the children already know may be used. 
Going beyond the standard list, you might name a Native American Redhorse or Whitesnake and still be well within the parameters of the age group. 
Some compound words in the word lists are listed at a higher grade level than where they usually would be placed. 
These words are listed at the levels at which they were actually used in graded texts. 
However, if the meaning is clear and the word is easily read, it can be used at a lower level.

### Publishing.

From this point on, the protagonist of your story should be at least the same age as, and preferably a little older than, the reader. 
Since there are few illustrations in easy readers, you need to help your reader identify the characters and give her easy ways to remember each character. 
One way to do this is with tags, actions, gestures, or physical attributes that easily identify the person for the reader. 
One character might constantly be pushing up his glasses when he talks, or another's red hair and freckles may make her memorable. 

Mysteries, adventures, and hero stories are very popular at this age. 
Vocabulary choice and sentence length are important because most books are aimed at self-readers. 
The ideal sentence length is still five or six words. 
However, some publishers have already increased the target sentence length to around ten words. 
Long passages of description are still unacceptable. 
There are many reasons to maintain a short sentence length, even if the publisher does not require it. 
The child reads one word at a time, then puts the words together to make a whole idea. 
The shorter the sentence is, the easier that process becomes. 
Thus, it is easier to understand. 
The inexperienced reader also gets a sense of accomplishment in successfully finishing and understanding a sentence. 

Most books run between 1,000 and 1,500 words. 
The low end is 500 words, and the high end is 2,000. 
Most magazines aimed at this age group use stories ranging from 300 to 500 words but welcome short pieces also. 
One thousand words is almost certain to be too long for a magazine. 
Check your writer's guide lines or Children's Writer's and Illustrator's Market for individual length requirements; remember, publishers generally list the maximum number of words they want. 
Second graders seem to be caught in the middle as far as books and magazines are concerned. 
They are neither at the beginning nor at the end of a period. 
Their interests, reading skills, and egos sometimes make reading picture books unacceptable, and heavily illustrated picture stories are often overlooked because they seem too "babyish." Even though the vocabulary goes beyond second grade, at this point the young reader or easy-to-read book comes into its own. 
The more adult presentation appeals to the seven- and eight-year-olds, and their reading skills are generally good enough that they no longer need the support provided by profuse illustrations. 

### Writing Samples.

The following story asks the young reader to use her imagination. 
It also demonstrates how to introduce a new word, barnacle:

Let's pretend you have an aquarium. 
What would you put in it? Would you put a cat in it? No. 
Cats don't live in water. 
Would you put a dog in it? No. 
Dogs don't live in water. 
Would you put a barnacle in it? You could. 
Barnacles live in water. 
But they aren't very pretty. 
They are small grayish sea animals. 
Would you put a fish in it? Yes. 
Fish live in water. 
Most fish are pretty. 
Some fish are beautiful. 
I think I like fish best. 
I would put them in my aquarium.

THIRD GRADE  
=============

Ecology, which was introduced in a minor way in second grade, is now expanded. 
The groups establishing national standards and benchmarks recommend including information on solid waste and recycling. 
Quite a few schools have recycling programs, and some clever teachers have the children not only save items like aluminum cans but take a field trip to a recycling plant. 
The children see what happens to the materials they collect and can get money for what they have done. 
The money can go to a special fund for the school or to buying something for the classroom. 
One of the challenges is to make the children understand why handling trash is important, and interesting stories about this process may well find a variety of markets. 

On a similar note, make sure you check current accepted science before dealing with greenhouse gases, global warming, or other controversial issues. 
Just as the fashions in teaching reading were in flux when the last edition of this book was written, opinions on some ecological issues are currently subject to change. 

Disaster preparedness is now introduced in third grade along with an increase in health and safety issues. 
Natural disasters are more commonly dealt with in the classroom than terrorism. 
One can see the difference that education and preparedness make when studying how communities deal with the same or similar incidents. 
Knowing what to do in the case of fire, earthquake, flood, or high winds can save lives, and that educational process often starts in the classroom. 

Diet is a particular focus now. 
Childhood obesity will probably be a political and social issue for ten, or more, years to come. 
The students are already familiar with the food pyramid, but knowing what calories are, or carbohydrates, and other issues generally wait for third grade. 
With today's emphasis on weight and health, the "Fat Albert" style of hero will probably be a hard sell, but be careful not to make fun of an overweight child. 
Personal attack, no matter what the fashion, is unacceptable. 

Space, new types of transportation, and a world of future science are also introduced in second and third grades. 
Science fiction stories as a genre once waited for fourth or fifth grade, but are now welcome. 
The stories should be based on what we can expect in a real future and should explain what things like rotocars are or how they work. 

### Social Changes.

Third graders begin identifying themselves with the world around them through attachments to objects such as toys. 
They begin to clearly prefer one thing to another. 
It is just this discovery of taste preferences that creates devoted fans. 
Whether it's Star Wars or the Little Mermaid, eight- and nine-year-old third graders are prime markets for toy manufacturers.

### In the Classroom.

Health, drug, and sex education are started early throughout the United States, and antidrug messages are often a part of the third-grade curriculum. 
In our culture, the word drug has generally taken on the connotation of being a narcotic or other controlled substance. 
In most schools, however, the idea has expanded to include caffeine, tobacco, and alcohol. 
It is wise to stay away from any positive portrayal of these substances, whether your work is aimed at an academic or popular market. 
The word medicine is generally used to specify the proper use of controlled substances.

Third graders do a lot of in-class reading and group reading. 
One of the popular classroom subjects is sports. 
The details, rules, and technical aspects of sports begin to be introduced at this level, and sports will remain a high-interest subject throughout all children's and young adult markets. 
Another ongoing interest is in mystery stories. 
While they are one of the most popular genres for young readers, there are a few rules you need to know. 
Too much violence is generally unacceptable for any juvenile writing. 
For preteens, murder is out, and so are most dead bodies. 
The only corpses generally are mummies that lend a safely creepy atmosphere to a story. 
For your youngest readers, such as those for this age, think about centering your mysteries on missing treasure or legends and secrets. 
Mysteries can actually hone academic skills in an entertaining way by acting as elaborate puzzles the reader must solve. 

### Specific Vocabulary Development.

The prefixes dis, ex, and re are added at this level. 
For example, disable, disadvantage, disallow, redo, reset, or any other word already introduced may be used with these prefixes.

Hyphenated words such as part-time, sit-ups, dry-eyed, and age-old are introduced in third grade. 

The suffix ment is also introduced at this level: excitement, encouragement.  

You may use the name of almost any body part at this level. 
Ankles, knees, shoulders, and even abdomen join the simpler head, arms, and legs previously introduced. 
Individual bones and muscles are not understood yet. 

### Publishing.

By third grade, children have reached the end of the primary reading level. 
They have some experience both reading and choosing books and are beginning to have a good idea of what type of story they like to read.

Your book title helps sell your story both by catching the reader's attention and giving him some idea of what the book is about. 
Mysteries or adventures often announce themselves with their title at this level: The Mystery of the Golden Door, The Adventure of Aben-Go-Down. 
The title can also announce whether the main character is a boy or a girl: Paula Makes a Mess, Norman Joins the Circus. 
It is true that most book titles are finally chosen by the publisher, but a carefully selected title may be part of what sells your book (and tells your publisher you understand the market) in the first place.

Juvenile publishing is one of the few areas where the commercial rights covered in every book contract may actually be exercised. 
Commercial rights cover the use of your story or characters for toys, posters, magnets, and a rather long list of other odd things. 
It doesn't happen often, but there are enough Sponge Bob, Elmo, and Batman t-shirts out there to make one hopeful. 
If you have not reserved commercial rights, all contracts for such items will go through your publisher, no matter how little they seem to resemble your book. 

### Writing Samples.

The following writing sample demonstrates how to introduce words not in the vocabulary: 

Every day Maria helps her family. 
She feeds the chickens and rolls up the bed mats from the dirt floor of their one-room house. 
She also makes a flat bread called tortillas. 
The tortillas are cooked on top of the stove. 

One day Maria woke up early. 
She was sure something special was going to happen. 
Then she remembered what it was. 
Today the men from the town were going to buy bricks in the city. 
They would bring back the bricks to build an oven for the pueblo. 
Her father would go with them to help. 

With an oven, they could make bread called bolillos. 
They are very much like French rolls. 
Maria knew that they could make sweet rolls called pan dulces. 
And they could even make cookies and cakes!

FOURTH GRADE  
==============

### Social Changes.

Fourth grade is a turning point in a child's development. 
Fourth graders are more independent and self-reliant. 
Homework is now considered their responsibility rather than one shared with parents. 
Most kids are able to read independently, and many begin to read on their own. 
Montessori programs often express the enthusiasm of the young reader as "exploding into reading." This describes many fourth graders well. 
The jump from the primary readers meant for the first four school years to the more sophisticated books aimed at fourth grade is almost an explosive one. 
Series books became popular in third grade because they give the reader confidence. 
In fourth grade, children often read simply for the pleasure of reading, whether they are adventure stories, mysteries, legends, or science fiction. 
Children often follow specific authors, such as Judy Blume, and buy book after book in a series such as Harry Potter or the Babysitters Club. 

### In the Classroom.

Fourth grade now covers much, if not most, of the new technology that has developed over the past ten years: digital equipment, new communication systems, smart houses, and the cyber-world. 
Thus, you will find some words that were previously listed as fifth or sixth grade words used at this level. 
You can also feel free to use virtually any word from this new vocabulary whether you are talking about podcasting or using a workstation. 
Astronomy, geology, paleontology, and other types of science and space are usually taught in fourth or fifth grade. 
Science fiction becomes a popular leisure reading subject because it combines the newly acquired academic knowledge with fast-paced adventure. 

Many words pertaining to American history are learned in fourth grade, as are the different U.S. 
states and the countries of the world. 
Many types of plants become familiar at this age also. 
The plants given in the word lists are the ones most commonly used in literature.

Local history is often introduced at this level. 
This means you can write about geographic areas such as the Rockies, the Great Plains, or New England because a large number of children will be exposed to these topics. 

Native American history is also studied in many fourth-grade classrooms. 
It is good policy to use the correct names for indigenous groups rather than using the anglicized or Spanish names. 
For example, it's just as easy for children to learn the name Kummeai for the peaceful Native American tribe that lived in San Diego as it is to learn the Spanish name Degunios. 
It's also just as easy to use Native Americans, Native American Indians, or indigenous peoples, as it is to use Indians. 
Your awareness of ethnic language concerns will enrich the experience of your readers. 

The new international economy and new breakthroughs in understanding disease have had an impact on health and fitness programs. 
Those experts helping shape the new curriculum recommend expanding fourth-grade education to include diet and the beginning of sex education. 
Specifically, standard programs now include information on AIDS and HIV, as well as smoking tobacco and drinking alcohol. 
Concepts of immunity, genetic links in disease, and disease control are also recommended for the age group. 

Words pertaining to foods, cooking, and measurements are introduced by this level and are frequently taught as part of "fun" projects in cooking. 
Children often make cookies or holiday foods in earlier grades, but now cooking is integrated with mathematics and sociology. 
Multicultural festivals at schools often attempt to pull together a great variety of skills in a creative, exciting way. 

### Publishing.

Whether it's space, videogames, or babysitting, both fiction and nonfiction for this age should deal with the special interests and problems of the eight- to twelve-year-old age group. 
Most books now range between 20,000 and 40,000 words. 
Typical magazine stories run between 700 and 2,000 words, but most publications also use a page or two of special-interest short-shorts under 100 words. 

Even the most conservative publishers now use the ten-word sentence as a target, with a maximum length of about twenty words. 
Even if it's not required, you should not go too far beyond twenty words at a stretch because ideas become more difficult to follow. 
Almost all children are still reading one word at a time at this level, and they can actually forget the subject being talked about in a long sentence. 

Be careful of using localized terminology, such as specific wildlife or customs unique to an area. 
For example, I once wrote a story on lighter-than-air vehicles---blimps to us old guys. 
I described an exciting new airship as looking "like a beach ball being carried on the back of a manta ray." My editor thought the description was too localized and kids in the Midwest wouldn't know what a manta ray was. 
We finally decided to say it looked "like a baseball with a handle attached." 

Make sure you check your facts if you are writing about something you remember from a few years ago, but you do not keep up on the subject. 
Paleontology is an excellent example. 
Good old Brontosaurus had become an Apatosaurus in the 1990s, and the idea that many species may have been warm-blooded and herded in family became widely accepted by the turn of the millennia. 
Current opinions may disagree with what was once considered fact. 

The elementary level, which covers fourth, fifth, and sixth grades, is the largest of all the markets for children's writers. 
Beyond sheer volume, your readers are loyal and appreciative. 
They write fan letters and buy or read all the books a favorite writer produces. 
That loyalty is the reason so many publishers want series books for this age. 
A few publishers won't even look at books that can't be made into a series, and presenting the possibility of a series in a book proposal may be a big plus with any publisher. 

Fiction stories should have lots of action, and a carefully crafted modern plot is absolutely necessary at this point. 
Many manuscripts are rejected simply because the plots are weak or outdated. 
Take the time to find out what hobbies and sports are currently popular, what issues children have to deal with, and what their dreams are; it will go a long way in helping sell your book. 

Science fiction is often a great way of explaining science concepts or imparting facts. 
As with any science fiction writing, your "hard science" facts must be correct. 

Nonfiction comes into its own in fourth, fifth, and sixth grades. 
Magazines and books specialize in science, mathematics, world events, and much more. 
When you write for these markets, keep track of your source material in case you need to supply a bibliography or support a fact. 
Do not submit a bibliography with a manuscript written for a periodical unless you are asked to do so or you know the publisher requires it. 
The Children's Writer's and Illustrator's Market listings sometimes note if one is necessary. 
When writing a nonfiction book, reference material should be cited.

### Writing Samples.

The following excerpt demonstrates the fourth grader's new interest in nonfiction and world events:

Towns are like families. 
The people who work give money to run the town. 
That year, more than half the people in South Renovo were out of work. 
That means they had over 50 percent unemployment. 
So the town didn't have much money to spend. 
It was so bad even the local YMCA had to shut down. 

It also meant Debra Burrows, the park director, had no money for summer projects. 
What she did have was over one hundred kids with nothing to do. 
She must have felt like Old Mother Hubbard. 
There were only two things left in the playground cupboard. 
They had two gallons of white glue and some paper. 
So the kids decided to see how long a paper chain they could make. 

Later in the same story is this paragraph, capitalizing on the interest of readers learning about measurements: 

Some kids had odometers on their bikes. 
They used them to measure one-tenth of a mile along the playground fence. 
The kids then measured their work in picnic tables (six feet). 
When they finished a picnic table length, they laid it along the fence. 
Eighty-eight picnic tables made one fence length. 
The kids made about one fence length, or one-tenth of a mile, each day.

FIFTH GRADE  
=============

### Social Changes.

New studies have shown that many children who have been struggling with reading until now break through in fifth grade. 
For example, about 60 percent of children in the study who had dyslexia and were typically reading at a second-grade level at the beginning of the year jumped to tenth- or twelfth-grade level by the end of the year. 
That jump typifies other, fairly dramatic, changes in a fifth-grader's life. 
Fifth graders begin to embark on the stage of growth that changes their focus from home to peers. 
This is fully realized by sixth and seventh grades, but it begins in fifth grade. 
Friends' opinions can have as much influence now as a parent's. 
Those euphemistically called "early bloomers" begin to see secondary sexual characteristics change. 
Many students become interested in the opposite sex, whereas others don't see what all the fuss is about. 
In any event, fifth graders become more focused on the outside world than before.

One way to tap into this new maturity and outside interest is to have students put together "real" television broadcasts or other media shows. 
Even the smallest schools can now produce packages (a complete program on tape or digital video meant to function as a self-contained, finished unit) of news programs, original plays, or other material to run free of charge on a variety of venues. 
In the past, owing to the low cost and ease of accessibility, most of the time that meant television; however, the possibilities have been greatly expanded. 
Streaming online video, Web-based television and radio broadcasting, podcasting, and other new technologies provide great potential for sharing the student's talent with the entire world. 
Free Web sites and production programs make these kinds of projects more economically feasible than ever before. 
In the Classroom. 
Current events generally become part of classroom learning and discussion in fifth grade. 
In most areas, fifth- or sixth-grade students have to memorize the states and their capitals. 
The children have a general idea of what each state is like, including their major agricultural and economic products. 

Most animals can be recognized at this level; echidnas and platypuses join more familiar animals as good subjects for stories and articles. 
Many cities, countries, and sites are introduced by fifth grade. 
If you choose to write about an unusual country, you should be sure to place it geographically; tell your reader that Belize is in Central America and Ghana is on the west coast of Africa. 

Prehistory is usually studied in fifth grade. 
Early man, cave paintings, fire and the development of civilization are often covered. 
Science teachers would like to make sure the children know that people did not keep dinosaurs as pets and that they actually know the eras these different species walked the earth. 
Even the most unusual dinosaurs, such as Cynognathus, are introduced with their proper name. 
New standards recommend that schools introduce earth sciences such as geology in a more sophisticated manner than in the past, including basic rock types and the scientific names of different geologic ages.

Ecology and environmentalism are major issues in children's magazines, text books, and general literature. 
These topics will remain important areas in children's publishing for many years to come. 

Nonfiction subjects that are often introduced in fourth grade in a rather casual way, such as hard science and current events, now become very important both in the classroom and out. 
Publishing. 
Become familiar with the magazines for this level. 
A large number of magazines cover everything from unusual animals and robots to ongoing peace and war negotiations to killer bees. 
Visit your local elementary school to see what magazines they carry.

For the teacher or writer, producing material for a television program (or the program itself) can engage students and readers in tremendously exciting projects in acting, reading, writing, and researching that have relevance to the children's lives. 
It also provides an excellent and growing market for those who want to write plays for children or work in other dramatic forms. 
It is just as easy to write for this medium correctly (and teach children to write for it correctly) as it is to produce something in a haphazard manner. 
Actually, most of the rules for broadcast writing are meant to make the material easier to use during production. 

Another alternative market is working with children in the electronic media. 
That could include computer programs or radio broadcasting. 

One of the ways to make news stories and other academic subjects relevant and interesting is called localization, that is, finding a local angle for the story. 
To do that, you might interview a family from a different country or cover a local ethnic festival. 
Localization is highly desirable in the classroom, in broadcast writing, and writing for local periodicals; but you must be careful not to assume that a broader audience will recognize, or be interested in, strictly local references. 
National magazines and books aimed at a national market are leery of any type of localization. 
This is also a good place to become aware of your options that go beyond the "normal" forms of publishing. 
Many of these alternative markets are grouped under "electronic rights" in your book publishing contract. 
Unimportant until recently, they include the possibility of your work being included in computer databases or sent by fax. 
Some publishers are beginning to sell material only via electronic marketing. 
To find these publishers, look under the syndicates listing in Writer's Market. 

### Writing Samples.

The following excerpt illustrates the technique of sneaking in a history lesson while actually telling a nonfiction story:

The tales of lost missions in Mexico are told wherever treasure hunters get together. 
The stories usually start off telling about gold and jewels hidden in the missions. 
They often end up being about the curses that are supposed to protect the treasure.

Most of these legends are, at best, flights of fancy. 
They grew out of daydreams and years of searching. 
Yet, the missions themselves are probably real. 
More than that, there is some proof the curses are real, too. 

Later in the same piece, a geography lesson is incorporated: 

Mountains run down Mexico's west coast, and few people live there. 
Even in the south, where there is lots of water, there are only a few place names on the map. 
Most of the "towns" shown are really only ranches where you can get some rest.

SIXTH GRADE AND MIDDLE SCHOOL  
===============================

### Social Changes.

Sixth grade is now commonly combined with seventh and eighth grades, or even ninth grade, to create a middle school. 
Most middle school students are preteens or young teenagers whose egos depend on being seen as that and not as children. 
Their social life is usually centered on groups of friends rather than on the family. 
They have favorite rock bands, and some have their own sources of income. 
Even though your reader may seem to have taken a giant step toward growing up, you should stay away from any positive portrayal of drugs, tobacco, alcohol, street language, explicit sex, graphic crime, or violence. 
Drunkenness should not be portrayed as humorous. 

Because of their own changes, the readers are usually very aware of their appearance and, subsequently, how characters in stories look. 
Description is not only acceptable, it's desired. 

### In the Classroom.

If they haven't already done so, most sixth-grade students are now required to memorize the states, their capitals, and their major economic contributions.

Overall, difficult subjects such as death and divorce are often dealt with at this level in a realistic way. 
Sixth grade also includes sex and health education. 
As a result, both in-school and leisure reading materials are often problem oriented. 

### Publishing.

Easy-reading books (also called hi-lo for high interest, low reading) begin to appear at this level. 
Most children now have a fairly sophisticated reading vocabulary, and the low achiever has begun to slip between the cracks. 
The easy-reading book is one way schools and other programs are trying to prevent that from happening. 
These books are written to cover readers from twelve-years-old through young adults, but they use a controlled vocabulary and sentence length appropriate to the lower vocabulary levels. 
These books are short and run from 400 to 1,200 words in length. 
They use a lot of action and dialogue, and often use sports, romance, mystery, and ethnic-urban problems as subjects for their stories. 

Besides being a part of the elementary eight- to twelve-year-old market, the sixth grader is more and more often a real part of the high school market, and others in the middle school group are firmly in its grasp. 
The high school group officially targets the thirteen- to seventeen-year-olds, but many readers are somewhat younger. 
This group uses an adult vocabulary (as long as it is not too sophisticated) and sentence structure. 
Most books range from 25,000 to 55,000 words, and longer lengths are permissible. 
Popular fiction subjects include romance, suspense, mild horror, the supernatural, and humor. 

More magazines are aimed at the elementary or middle school group than any other. 
Eighty percent of the magazine stories are nonfiction and include age-related problems, dress, dating, interviews, fads, and special interests. 
Periodical stories usually range from 1,000 to 3,500 words. 

By sixth grade, it becomes important to the reader to know exactly how a character, especially a leading character, looks. 
The just-preteen reader identifies with the leading characters in the books she reads, and her concerns about her own appearance are directly transferred to those characters. 
Others in the middle school group want to know how a character dresses, what kind of makeup they wear, how they get around without mom driving, and other issues that help answer very personal questions. 
Do be careful when you describe your characters not to make them too much a part of a popular fad either in dress or in speech. 
Fads pass quickly, and your book may follow if the reader sees it as "too last year." 

### Writing Samples.

The following example shows the increased description present in stories for this age group. 
Not only do readers now have longer attention spans, they want descriptive details and like to know how characters look:

Elizabeth thought that it was impossible not to admire him. 
Yet, if you looked at his features one at a time, there was little special about him. 
He was slim for his 5 feet 10 inches. 
Besides his eyes, his gold hair and beard were his best features. 
Elizabeth smiled to herself. 
She remembered how Bob had grown that beard. 

The following excerpt from a nonfiction piece uses the longer sentence length and, again, more description than is found in books for younger readers: 

One of the reasons we are not sure if these creatures are real is that their habitats are desolate mountain ranges. 
In Asia, the Abominable Snow Man is supposed to live in the areas that are permanently covered with snow. 
Its shaggy white coat is the perfect camouflage for its surroundings. 
In North America, Bigfoot's dark shaggy hair serves the same purpose, and, if it is real, it stays well hidden in the shadows and foliage.
